# iiif-flask-app

This tool aims to solve a general problem in the Digital Humanities by creating a prototype of a repurposable platform that could be used as a simple tool to aggregate and search across any kind of digitised content available over IIIF (the [International Image Interoperability Framework](https://iiif.io/)), by scholars working on any kind of material, without the need for a high level of technical expertise, financial resources or institutional infrastructure.

## Installation on macOS or Unix-like systems

1. Clone or download the repository on your computer.
2. Open terminal and navigate to the repository directory. 
3. Create virtual environment in repository directory:
```
python -m venv venv
```

4. Activate virtual environment from within repository directory:
``` 
source venv/bin/activate
```

5. Install Python dependencies from requirements file:
```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

6. Create secret key for app security, see Secret Key section below.

## Installation on Windows (PowerShell)

1. Clone or download the repository on your computer.
2. Open Powershell terminal and navigate to the repository directory.
3. Create virtual environment in repository directory:
```
python -m venv venv
```

4. Activate virtual environment from within repository directory:
``` 
.\myenv\Scripts\Activate
```

5. Install Python dependencies from requirements file:
```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
6. Create secret key for app security, see Secret Key section below.

## Using the Tool

### IIIF Manifest Extraction

1. Open terminal and navigate to the repository directory. 
2. Activate virtual environment as in installation instructions.
3. Navigate to the following file:
```
iiif_extraction/input/input.txt
```

4. Insert a list of IIIF manifest URIs or IIIF collection URIs on individual lines within the file (there are examples of how they should appear within the file, delete these and add your own).
5. Navigate back to the "iiif_extraction" directory and run the following command to run the manifest extraction code:
```
python iiif_extractor.py
```

6. This will extract the IIIF manifests for the URIs entered in the "input.txt" file. The manifests will be saved in the "outputs" directory.
7. The process of extraction may take a while, monitor the terminal for progress.
8. Successful manifest extraction and any errors in extraction process reported in the terminal.

### IIIF Flask Application

1. Open terminal and navigate to root directory of repository.
2. Activate virtual environment as in installation instructions.
3. Copy the files generated by the "iiif_extraction" script and move them to the "iiif_flask_app/files" directory. These manifest files will be used to create the index for your application.
4. Navigate to "iiif_flask_app/config.py". This file forms the basis of the editable text and image sections of the application, together with some aspects of security.
5. Edit the sections of the "config.py" to fit the requirements of your application. Do not edit the "SECRET_KEY" variable as this will be generated separately, see Secret Key section below. Instructions for each section of the "config.py" file are commented throughout, read the comments carefully and change the sections accordingly.
6. Navigate to the "iiif_flask_app" directory and run the following command:
```
python app.py
```

7. Open browser and navigate to the following url to run the application locally on your machine:
```
http://127.0.0.1:5000
```

## Secret Key

### Set up a secret key on macOS or Unix-like systems

1. Open terminal.
2. Identify shell type, Zsh or Bash:
```
echo $SHELL
```

3. Check if profile file exists, run one of following commands for Bash or Zsh shells respectively:
```
ls ~/.bashrc
ls ~/.zshrc
```

4. Create profile file in home directory if not there, run one of following commands for Bash or Zsh shells respectively:
```
touch ~/.bashrc
touch ~/.zshrc
```

5. Generate secret key token by using following commands and copy the resulting token:
```
python
import secrets
secrets.token_hex(16)
exit()
```

6. Open profile file by running one of following commands for Bash or Zsh shells respectively:
```
nano ~/.bashrc
nano ~/.zshrc
```

7. Add secret key to profile file by adding the following line to the file:
```
export IIIF_FLASK_KEY="your generated key copied here"
```
Then save and close the editor (Ctrl+X, then Y, then Enter for Nano editor).

8. Apply changes by running one of following commands for Bash or Zsh shells respectively:
``` 
source ~/.bashrc
source ~/.zshrc
```

### Set up a secret key on Windows

1. Open __Powershell__ terminal.
2. Generate __secret key token__ by using following commands and __copy the resulting token__:
```
python
import secrets
secrets.token_hex(16)
exit()
```

3. Exit the Powershell terminal and use the following instructions on desktop.
4. Open the __Control Panel__.
5. Go to __System and Security__.
6. Click on __System__.
7. Select __Advanced system settings__ on the left side.
8. In the __System Properties__ window, click on the __Environment Variables__ button.
9. In the __User variables__ section, click on the __New..__ button.
10. In the New User Variable window, enter __IIIF_FLASK_KEY__ in the __Variable name__ field and your copied __secret key token__ in the __Variable value__ field and click on the __OK__ button.
11. Finally, click on the __OK__ button in the __Environment Variables__ window.


